L00001	NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
L00002	Gilchrist G, Dheensa S, Johnson A, et al. Understanding and reducing intimate partner violence perpetrated by men who misuse substances: the ADVANCE research programme. Southampton (UK): National Institute for Health and Care Research; 2025 Oct. (Programme Grants for Applied Research, No. 13.10.)
L00003	## Understanding and reducing intimate partner violence perpetrated by men who misuse substances: the ADVANCE research programme.
L00004	For more details, see Gadd et al.,2 Radcliffe et al.,5 Love et al.,8 Gilchrist et al.11
L00005	Interviews were conducted separately with male IPV perpetrators and their female (ex)-partners to:
L00006	- describe what contributes to IPV and ascertain their relationship/support needs
L00007	- explore the role of intoxication and substance use within violent acts
L00008	- test/revise the main IPV perpetrator typologies from meta-ethnography [WP1(i)]
L00009	- identify pathways into substance use and IPV.
L00010	Participants’ stories about substance use, relationships and particular examples of abuse were elicited in interviews, using techniques adapted from the FANI method.83
L00011	Thirty-seven men were recruited from six community-based substance use treatment services in England. Keyworkers at these services identified men with a history of IPV perpetration from their caseloads and researchers also approached prospective male participants in waiting rooms. Men 18 years or older, receiving substance use treatment, able to be interviewed in English and answering positively to questions in the IPV screening questionnaire were eligible.
L00012	Men were asked to provide contact details for their (ex)-partner/s so that researchers could invite them for interview. Contact details were provided for 32 (ex)-partners, 14 of whom agreed to participate.
L00013	Participants were advised of limits to confidentiality. Different researchers interviewed women and men in the same dyad to ensure no inadvertent information sharing and services’ safeguarding protocols were followed to ensure participant safety. Participants received £20 to compensate their time.
L00014	Timelines were created to track the sequence of events through each participant’s life. Case studies were then written up as ‘pen portraits’, capturing the complexity revealed in each interview. In 14 cases, where both partners were interviewed, men’s and women’s accounts were compared. The analysis integrated a theoretically driven thematic and narrative approach84 to identify key ways in which substance use featured in attributions and explanations for IPV.85 NVivo (QSR International, Warrington, UK) was used for managing qualitative data.
L00015	Table 1 shows male and female dyad characteristics.
L00016	Codes included Intoxication, Withdrawal and Craving, and Financial Abuse linked to Substance Use. The overarching narratives, used by male and female participants, were: sexual betrayal/sexual jealousy, mutual combat/fighting back, protection/control and psychological vulnerabilities (Figure 3).
L00017	Themes and narrative descriptions.
L00018	Intoxication provided explanations for IPV perpetration for both men and women. Sometimes violence associated with intoxication was an aberrant and/or one-off incident. Sometimes intoxication was entangled with enduring violence in perpetrators’ paranoid perceptions of sexual betrayal. Separating the effects of intoxication from controlling behaviour that justified physical violence was often difficult. Craving and withdrawal from heroin and crack also provided explanations for violence, where partners competed for drugs, and in disputes about how to raise funds to buy drugs. While male partners referred to the need to protect (ex)-partners from unscrupulous others, women often reported these behaviours as controlling. Women who did not use drugs often described substance-related financial abuse, where money was taken for drugs ‘he’s having money off me all the time again’ (Gemma, cannabis use, Geoff/Gemma dyad), and family members’ possessions stolen. Psychological vulnerabilities featured in participants’ rationalisation of IPV. Most male and female participants reported experiencing childhood and adult adversity and related mental health problems (Table 2). Substance use was described as suppressing disturbing thoughts that resulted in violence when they emerged.
L00019	Quotes supporting the key themes from dyad interviews
L00020	(Ex)-partners were distinguished according to whether they had (1) never used, (2) previously been dependent on or (3) continued to use illicit substances or alcohol. Analysis of these dyad accounts revealed the confusion and deception women felt as men projected their loss of control upon them. Men’s attempts to coercively control their (ex)-partners frequently became more dangerous and desperate when women questioned or challenged their substance use or the diversion of funds it entailed. Abusive men often sought to exonerate and excuse their violence. Survivors who used substances felt unable to be open and honest, reflecting stigma connected to their own substance use, fear of further IPV and removal of children.
L00021	Analysing data from 37 interviews with perpetrators to address the cognitive, behavioural, affective and contextual factors contributing to IPV, 3 overlapping pathways into substance-related IPV were distinguished (Figure 4):
L00022	Key steps in substance use-related IPV pathways. IPA, intimate partner abuse.
L00023	- Men in the rule-breaking pathway (n = 11) reported childhood exposure to physical abuse and emotional abuse in male-dominated households, early rule-breaking behaviours and engagement in antisocial and offending behaviours.
L00024	- Men in the entrenched substance use pathway (n = 13) reported childhood exposure to high levels of trauma (particularly sexual and physical abuse), early substance use, addiction and an entrenched substance-using lifestyle.
L00025	- Men in the relationship insecurity pathway (n = 13) reported being in long-term relationships, lifestyles that included employment, housing and support networks. Substance-related IPV was often driven by alcohol intoxication and discussed alongside sexual jealousy and insecurities. Men reported low levels of childhood trauma and substance use onset during adolescence.
L00026	Various typologies have been proposed: perpetrators of severe and escalating forms of IPV, characterised by multiple forms of abuse, terrorisation, threats and possessive and controlling behaviour; and perpetrators of a more moderate form of relationship violence.39,78,86 In our study, 35 of the 37 men depicted their IPV as situational and/or a product of mutual combat, whereas all but one (ex)-partner depicted coercively controlling abuse, to which around half responded with some violent resistance. Distinguishing dyads based on whether survivors had ever used drugs and, if they had, whether they were desisting from or still using substances offer more meaningful distinctions. Across the three pathways, men’s childhood and early experiences led to different journeys into IPV associated with intoxication, withdrawal, acquisition and substance-using lifestyles. Each pathway presented differently with varying core features, for example, generalised violence, mental health or jealousy and different predisposing background factors, including types and timing of childhood abuse and trauma.
L00027	## Implications for intervention development
L00028	Our findings improve our understanding of heterogeneity in men who perpetrate IPV and misuse substances and propose treatment/intervention targets,87 further supporting the need for interventions that concurrently address the complex interconnections of IPV with substance misuse.29,80
L00029	Men in the rule-breaking pathway may require the most intensive intervention.88 Removing substance use would not be sufficient to address IPV. Rescripting childhood experiences, enhancing distress tolerance and self-regulation and reframing automatic cognitions linked to need for control, violence and entitlement towards women are key to intervening effectively with this group. For men in the entrenched substance use pathway who have experienced early adversity and disrupted connection-seeking attachments,89 a focused intervention should address emotional regulation and use of substances to cope. In the relationship insecurity pathway, IPV drivers were more situational. Treatment for/abstinence from substance use, increasing coping skills and promoting general protective factors, such as employment, may lower the risk of IPV.90
L00030	The psychopharmacological effects of substance use were rarely the only explanation for IPV perpetration which was primed and entangled with narratives of sexual jealousy, male participants’ perception of female impropriety and women’s apparent opposition to male authority. Our analysis highlighted ‘economic-compulsive’91 abuse, where disputes or abuse occurred due to the need to acquire (money for) substances and frequently escalated from female partners’ attempts to oppose coercive control.
L00031	The temporal order of events, substance use and IPV was not always clear. Social desirability and under-reporting may have featured in our analysis. While the sample was not ethnically diverse, it was reflective of the national treatment population.92 Only men’s relationship perspectives were analysed to identify pathways.
L00032	This work was produced by Gilchrist et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care. This is an Open Access publication distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 4.0 licence, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, reproduction and adaptation in any medium and for any purpose provided that it is properly attributed. See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. For attribution the title, original author(s), the publication source – NIHR Journals Library, and the DOI of the publication must be cited.
L00033	- Cite this PageGilchrist G, Dheensa S, Johnson A, et al. Understanding and reducing intimate partner violence perpetrated by men who misuse substances: the ADVANCE research programme. Southampton (UK): National Institute for Health and Care Research; 2025 Oct. (Programme Grants for Applied Research, No. 13.10.) Work package 1(ii): in-depth narrative interviews with male intimate partner violence perpetrators in substance use treatment and their female (ex)-partners.
L00034	- PDF version of this title (2.2M)
L00035	- Implications for intervention development
L00036	### Other titles in this collection
L00037	- Programme Grants for Applied Research
L00038	- Work package 1(ii): in-depth narrative interviews with male intimate partner vio...Work package 1(ii): in-depth narrative interviews with male intimate partner violence perpetrators in substance use treatment and their female (ex)-partners - Understanding and reducing intimate partner violence perpetrated by men who misuse substances: the ADVANCE research programme
L00039	Your browsing activity is empty.
L00040	Activity recording is turned off.
L00041	Facebook LinkedIn .cls-11, .cls-12 { fill: #737373; } .cls-11 { fill-rule: evenodd; } GitHub .cls-1{fill:#737373;} NCBI Insights Blog Connect with NLM
L00042	- .st20 { fill: #FFFFFF; } .st30 { fill: none; stroke: #FFFFFF; stroke-width: 8; stroke-miterlimit: 10; } Twitter
L00043	- .st10 { fill: #FFFFFF; } .st110 { fill: none; stroke: #FFFFFF; stroke-width: 8; stroke-miterlimit: 10; } Facebook
L00044	- Youtube .st4 { fill: none; stroke: #FFFFFF; stroke-width: 8; stroke-miterlimit: 10; } .st5 { fill: #FFFFFF; }
L00045	National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894
L00046	Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
L00047	Help Accessibility Careers
